The Medical Application of Efficacy Phrases in the Old
English Medical Corpus

REVIEW OF SCHOLARSHIP
Candidate Number: P4765

4996 Words
MLA 7th Edition Stylesheet

2

The Medical Application of Efficacy Phrases in the Old English Medical
Corpus
REVIEW OF SCHOLARSHIP
CONTENTS
I.

Introduction

II. Anglo-Saxon Medicine: Towards a Dichotomy
III. Efficacy Phrases and Potential Medical Applications
IV. Conclusion

ABBREVIATIONS
AS — Anglo-Saxon
OE — Old English
EP — Efficacy Phrase

BL — Bald’s Leechbook
LIII — Leechbook III
LAC — Lacnunga
OEH — Old English Herbal

I. INTRODUCTION
My dissertation aims to unify a dichotomy in the study of Anglo-Saxon medicine—
rational remedies1 and faith healing2— by analyzing efficacy phrases and examining whether
they are evidence of placebo use in AS medicine.3 Though the placebo effect has only been
recognized and empirically studied in the modern age, the use of a placebo was likely understood
by AS practitioners under the guise of a more familiar idea: faith.4 By establishing that Old
English texts capitalized on the healing power of faith, I will argue that EPs, as mechanisms of
intention setting,5 become medicine in and of themselves. As a result, rational remedies and faith
healing may arguably be unified within the category of viable medical practice.
I have organized this work into two sections. The first section provides an overview of
scholarship on AS medicine to show how this dichotomy was produced and supported by past
scholarship. The second section addresses scholarship on EPs, how medieval faith healing may
be analogous to the modern placebo effect, contemporary studies investigating whether faith

1 rational remedies: these are remedies within OE texts that are considered by scholars to be formulated

with “rationality”, often argued to be due to a remedy’s classical origins. Remedies found to be viable are
usually incorporated into this designation, even if they were previously considered useless.
2 Faith healing will be defined in this Review as healing attributed solely to the power of faith or belief,

often within a religious context. “faith healing” Oxford English Dictionary. online.

3 “Efficacy phrases (EPs) are passages in medical recipes that testify to the value or effectiveness of the

end product: the medicine itself. The term efficacy statement was first used by Hunt in 1990.” Mäkinen.
“Efficacy phrases in Early Modern English medical recipes.” 158–178.
For example, “this is a special leechdom” or “this is a powerful salve.”
For the work of this Review, the placebo effect (placebo) will be defined as it is used in current
scientific papers researching the effect: a process by which “a biomedical intervention is simulated
[through the] effects of imagination, will, belief.” Kaptchuk. “Placebo Studies and Ritual Theory.” 1853.
4

5 intention setting: stating the desired result of an action, with the belief that it will assist in bringing this

result to fruition. This is a common tool in meditation practices, as well as placebo-based healing.
Kaptchuk. “Placebo Studies and Ritual Theory.” 1856.

2
healing is a form of the placebo effect, and finally how these studies may relate to the AS
context.6

II. ANGLO-SAXON MEDICINE: TOWARDS A DICHOTOMY
The three-volume work, Leechdoms, Wortcunning, and Starcraft of Early England,
positioned T.O. Cockayne as the scholar solely responsible for providing the textual foundations
of the study of AS medicine in the modern age.7 Cockayne distinguished himself as a gifted and
productive philologist in his lifetime,8 and his work on AS medicine was even said to be “…one
of the most important pieces of medical scholarship that has so far appeared from the pen of an
English writer.” 9 Based on his creation of the field, I would agree with this laudatory statement
—although with some caveats.
In his volumes, he brought into print several major works in the OE medical corpus:
Bald’s Leechbook, the Lacnunga, and the Old English Herbal. These editions were based on
folios from three manuscripts currently housed at the British Library: Royal 12 D. XVII, Harley
MS 585, and Cotton MS Vitellius C.III. Royal 12 D. XVII contains two separate medical texts,
with recipes organized by chapters. The origin is unknown, but the manuscript is believed to be a
Winchester production from the mid-tenth century.10 Harley MS 585 includes a copy of the
herbal Pseudo-Apuleius and the Medicina de quadrupedibus, with the LAC found on folios 130r
6 field application: how charms or remedies were applied outside of their textual context by practitioners

on suffering patients.

7 Van Arsdall. Medieval Herbal Remedies. pp. 1–34.
8 Kenneally. “Cockayne, Thomas Oswald (bap. 1809, d. 1873), philologist and teacher.”
9 Morton and Norman. Morton's Medical Bibliography, 5th ed. p. 356.
10 Hollis and Wright. Old English Prose of Secular Learning. p. 211.

3
—193r. The text, dated to the late tenth or early eleventh century, is mainly OE, but with Latin
and Old Irish inclusions.11 Cockayne edited and translated his last text from the ninth-century
Cotton MS Vitellius C.III, which includes the OEH on folios 11–85.12 However, Christine Voth
has since argued that Cockayne altered the text of these manuscripts during his translations and
editions, in some cases for clarity or to strengthen his argument for parallels between the AS
remedies and classical sources.13 Therefore, while Cockayne developed the corpus of OE
medical writing, scholars now rely on more recent editions for reference and textual context,
where they exist.
Throughout his three volumes, Cockayne supplemented his translations with various
arguments and historical context, including similarities between AS and classical medicine, lists
of plant names, discussion of various solar and lunar calendars, horoscopes, and dream
interpretation, all which provided a valuable foundation for future scholars studying these texts.
Like Cockayne, Hubert Jan de Vriend discusses the interrelation of Latin originals of the OEH
and Medicina de quadrupedibus in his editions. He also includes a thorough list of plant names
and a discussion of plant identification in OE manuscripts which greatly improved upon
Cockayne’s lists.14 Stephen Pollington added more context on the influence of religion to his
edition of Leechbook III, as well as Cockayne's earlier edition of BL, by examining AS healing
practices and views of illness through AS approaches to plant medicine, tree-lore, charms,

11 Pettit. Anglo-Saxon Remedies, Charms, and Prayers.
12 Cockayne, ed. Leechdoms, Wortcunning, and Starcraft of Early England. vol. I. p. xxvii.
13 Voth. Analysis of the Tenth-Century Anglo-Saxon Manuscript London, British Library, Royal 12. D.

xvii.

14 Vriend. The Old English Herbarium; and Medicina de quadrupedibus.

4
dreams, shamanism, amulets, and causes of disease.15 Edward Pettit combined the two
approaches with an examination of classical sources for the LAC as well as a discussion of native
beliefs in elves, spirits, witches, and sentient plants. He also included analysis on the collection’s
palaeography and codicology.16 Lastly, Anne van Arsdall’s vital translation of the OEH is
accompanied by analysis written for a lay audience as well as academics and is more focused on
an investigation into Cockayne’s volumes.17 She points out that Cockayne was an eccentric
antiquarian, influenced greatly by a renewed Victorian interest in the occult, but argues that his
volumes are still academically useful despite this, due to their contributions to OE philology and
the corpus of OE texts.
However, OE medical works were considered ineffective, magical productions of
“barbarian hordes,” starting with Cockayne.18 In turn, remedies that did not serve philological or
historical study were considered the “savage” practice of “the most ignorant persons…
particularly old women.”19 This attitude continued into the twentieth century, despite criticism
from the likes of J. F. Payne, who said that previous scholars had only viewed the texts with
either “scorn” or “condescen[sion].”20 He recommended that “the only way to understand these
old writers is to try to put ourselves as far as possible in their place.”21 However, that advice was
largely, if not entirely, ignored. After Payne, there was very little scholarship on AS medicine,

15 Pollington. Leechcraft: Early English Charms, Plantlore and Healing.
16 Pettit. Anglo-Saxon Remedies, Charms, and Prayers.
17 Van Arsdall. The Old English Herbarium and Anglo-Saxon Medicine.
18 Cockayne, ed. Leechdoms, Wortcunning, and Starcraft of Early England. vol. I. p. xxvii.
19 Berdoe. The Origin and Growth of the Healing Art. p. 274.
20 Payne. English Medicine in the Anglo-Saxon. p. 38.
21

Ibid. p. 39.

5
except for a few works done by amateurs, and the earlier ideologies from Cockayne remained.
For example, in an article on OE toothache charms, B.R. Townend repeated Cockayne's
designation by referring to narrative charms as “superstitious” and said that, in particular, the OE
“spell was valueless.”22
When scholarly attention returned to AS medicine in the mid-twentieth century, this
attitude continued. Early in his career, Wilfrid Bonser stated that AS magical inclusions to these
texts represented “the lowest degradation to which medicine has fallen.”23 Not one year later,
these sentiments were echoed in J. H. G Grattan and Charles Singer’s influential edition of the
LAC with accompanying notes. In Grattan and Singers’ edition, AS medicine was referred to as
“barbarous”24 and the “final pathological disintegration of the great system of Greek medical
thought.”25 This degradation of classical sources was attributed to the corruption of
“Pythagorean”-inspired numerical and geometric devices, Byzantine magic circles, and Hebrew
numbers, as well as the use of illustrations featuring centaurs, classical gods, or plant species
only found in the coastal inlets of Italy.26
Bonser returned a decade later with a survey of a variety of subjects in the study of AS
medicine including epidemics, pagan superstitions, and the spread of classical works.27 However,
while Bonser did not assert that AS medicine was a degradation of classical rationality like
Singer and Grattan, he in no way championed it. Even into the seventies, AS medical remedies
22 Townend. “The Narrative Charm with Special Reference to the Cure of Toothache.” 29–31.
23 Bonser. “Anglo-Saxon Medical Nomenclature.” 13.
24 Grattan and Singer. Anglo-Saxon Magic and Medicine. p. 3.
25 Ibid. p. 94.
26 Ibid. pp. 23–79.
27 Bonser. The Medical Background of Anglo-Saxon England.

6
that included belief or religion were referred to as “lore … [and] humbug” by major scholars,
such as Michael McVaugh.28
These dismissive views were only countered as the study of OE medical texts increased.
In a survey of AS herbal knowledge, Linda Voigts defended the practicality of these texts. She
argued that previous scholars had underestimated AS herbal knowledge, usually by showing that
efficacious plants could only grow in warmer climates, and therefore must have been known
through classical sources. However, she argued that due to climate differences and
aracheobotanical evidence from Gloucestershire Abbey of mediterranean plants in England, this
may have been insular knowledge as well. She concluded that “in short, we must grant that
Anglo-Saxons valued healing plants, that they valued books about healing plants, and that they
dealt with both intelligently.”29 Barbara Olds, in her edition of one medical text, commented on
AS medicine as a whole: “[LIII] is perhaps the best example of the complexity and diversity of
Anglo-Saxon medicine … at once extremely practical and wildly fantastic.”30 Olds made one of
the first assertions that OE medical texts could be viewed as practical.
The scholarship of Voigts and Olds track the slow progression from a derogatory view of
AS medicine in the early twentieth century to a predominant idea in AS medical studies: the
dichotomy between “rational” and “magical” remedies. In these works, this transition was often
facilitated by the related dichotomy between classical (rational) knowledge and insular
(“deplorable”) beliefs.31

28 McVaugh. “The Liber de diversis medicinis in the Thornton Manuscript.” (Book Review). 542.
29 Voigts. “Anglo-Saxon Plant Remedies and the Anglo-Saxons.” 266.
30 Olds. The Anglo-Saxon Leechbook III. p. 10.
31 Baader. “Early Medieval Latin Adaptations of Byzantine Medicine in Western Europe.” 251.

7
This dichotomy can be traced back to Cockayne, but it was made concrete in the field by
the middle of the twentieth century. Scholars went to great lengths to expose the indebtedness of
rationality in OE texts to classical sources while blaming any “nonsense” on insular thought.32 At
the most extreme, as with Singer and Grattan, AS medicine allegedly demonstrated the
degradation of classical knowledge in the hands of insular physicians. Later scholars pushed
back against this contention. For example, Godfred Storms identified the influences— and in
some cases, direct translation—of classical texts in BL, LIII, and the LAC, arguing that medical
rationality can be traced to these sources and that classical texts were well-known among learned
practitioners.33 Charles Talbot took this further and argued that this classical rationality was
widely spread in AS England through the writing of Hippocrates, Dioscorides and others, and
had greater influence than texts such as the LAC would suggest.34
This ideological trajectory continued, with the term “rational” being directly attributed to
classical knowledge in opposition to “inferior … pagan magic” by Stanley Rubin.35 However, the
dichotomy fully materialized with an extremely influential work from the early 90s. M. L.
Cameron’s Anglo-Saxon Medicine establishes a set stratum between the rational and superstitious
in AS medicine.36 Yet, in a turn away from previous scholarship, he concludes that the rational
element in AS medicine has been greatly underestimated by earlier commentators.37 However,
following Cameron’s near obsession with the categorizations of remedies as either rational or
32 Cockayne, ed. Leechdoms, Wortcunning, and Starcraft of Early England. vol. I. p. xxviii.
33 Storms. Anglo-Saxon Magic.
34 Talbot. Medicine in Medieval England.
35 Rubin. Medieval English Medicine. p. 62.
36 Cameron. Anglo-Saxon Medicine.
37 Cameron. “Anglo-Saxon Medicine and Magic.” 19–215.

8
superstitious, this topic was rarely taken up, the only notable exceptions being the work of Faye
Getz38 and Audrey Meaney.39
Scholarship focused, instead, on defending against previous damage done to the reputation
of AS medicine by the likes of Singer and Bonser. Most scholars took up the understated Latin
learning in OE medical texts. For example, Debby Banham points to OE medical texts where
illnesses are blamed on excessive heat or cold —though the humoral theoretical underpinnings of
these assertions are not included.40 Similarly, Maria D’Aronco, argues that “compared with the
Continent, Anglo-Saxon England was not a backwater” in regard to classical learning.41
Peregrine Horden also attempts to rehabilitate the image of AS medicine by contextualizing the
surrounding concepts, texts, and sociology that created them.42
Few works since the turn of the millennium have directly engaged with Cameron’s
dichotomy. As a result, some scholars, such as Banham,43 think the dichotomy no longer plays a
significant role in the study of AS medicine. I disagree. The research of Banham, Horden,
D’Arnoco and others continue to operate with Cameron’s dichotomy as an underlying
assumption. Arguing that AS medicine had more Latinity than previously thought, in an attempt
to bolster its worth, merely reinforces the continued legacy of viewing classical knowledge as the
true source of rationality. New experiments also perpetuate the continued use of this dichotomy.

38 Getz. Medicine in the English Middle Ages. pp. 5–17.
39 Meaney. “The Practice of Medicine in England about the Year 1000.” 221–237.
40 Banham. “A Millennium in Medicine?” 234.
41 D’Aronco. “Nephrological Disorders in Anglo-Saxon Medicine.” 42–49.
42 Horden. “What's Wrong with Early Medieval Medicine?” 5–25.
43 Banham, personal communication.

9
When Christina Lee and the Ancientbiotics team at Nottingham University discovered a
new antimicrobial agent in BL that defeated hospital-borne superbugs like MRSA, the unusual
combination of modern science and antiquated “magic” made waves far beyond academic
communities. Sensational headlines proposed that “real magic” had been found,44 while more
conservative sources touted the possibility that ancient texts could serve as a source for new
medications.45 Lee’s work, building on an older foundation,46 has sparked a wave of similar
research— including further work from Lee’s Ancientbiotics team at Nottingham and work on
plant compounds in OE texts by Frances Watkins.47
Cameron’s dichotomy is explicitly present in how these researchers selected which
remedies to study. Harrison et al. state that while “medieval medicine has generally been
dismissed as backwards or superstitious … recent scholars [specifically Cameron] have
suggested that among the remedies there may be methods and recipes that indicate a more factual
application.”48 The entire process of selecting which remedies to test was informed by the
presence of Cameron’s dichotomy and its main assumption: some remedies are more rational,
therefore viable, than others, and those “others” are almost always superstitious or religious in
nature. The focus of these studies on pulling viable pharmaceuticals out of so-called “surprising”
medieval contexts shows how severe this dichotomy has become,49 and it is not without

44 Harrison, et al. “A 1,000-Year-Old Antimicrobial Remedy with Antistaphylococcal Activity.” 1115–29.
45 Ossola. “Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria Are No Match For Medieval Potion.” online.
46 Brennessel, et al. “A Reassessment of the Efficacy of Anglo-Saxon Medicine.” 183–195.
47 Watkins, et al. “Antimicrobial Assays of Three Native British Plants Used in Anglo-Saxon Medicine for

Wound Healing Formulations in 10th Century England.” 408–415.

48 Harrison, et al. “A 1,000-Year-Old Antimicrobial Remedy with Antistaphylococcal Activity.” 1115.
49 Ibid. 1119.

10
drawbacks. According to Ciaran Arthur, stripping these remedies “from their manuscript sources
and often [studying them] in isolation… calls into question how the manuscripts’ scribes and
readers understood these rituals.”50 AS practitioners would not view AS medicine under such
dichotomies, and these texts need to be seen as a whole if scholars are to truly understand how
this medicine was learned, understood, and applied. I would go even farther and argue that the
assimilation of “rational” and faith-driven approaches in AS medicine may actually have
increased overall medical viability.

III. EFFICACY PHRASES AND POTENTIAL MEDICAL APPLICATIONS
The research being done at Nottingham, as well as similar work by Watkins and others, is
leading to the consensus that these texts contain usable medical knowledge. However, this is
often offered with a disclaimer. According to Horden, scholars must concede that AS medicine
on the whole “did not work. It is … ‘bad medicine’, at best a placebo.”51 Yet, even when the
recipes seem pure magic, they should not be rejected exactly because of the potential for
placebo. Studies in medicine and psychology have shown that magical or religious beliefs do not
hinder medical work, as often suggested in contemporary medicine. In fact, belief may be a
powerful cure by itself. According to the placebo effect theory, a strong belief in a medical
procedure alone can yield impressive medical results. A recent New York Times Magazine
article, which addressed the research of the Society for Interdisciplinary Placebo Studies and Ted

50 Arthur. ‘Charms’, Liturgies, and Secret Rites in Early Medieval England. p. 215.
51 Horden. “What's Wrong with Early Medieval Medicine?” 20.

11
Kaptchuck at Harvard Medical school, summed up various studies on the effects of placebo
compiled over the past century:
Give people a sugar pill, they have shown, and those patients — especially if the
treatment is delivered by someone in whom they have confidence — will improve…
Take athletes to the top of the Alps, put them on exercise machines and hook them to an
oxygen tank, and they will perform better than when they are breathing room air — even
if room air is all that’s in the tank. Wake a patient from surgery and tell him you’ve done
an arthroscopic repair, and his knee gets better even if all you did was knock him out and
put a couple of incisions in his skin.52
Such studies could show that Christian and pagan beliefs extant in the OE medical corpus
were not tainting medical knowledge, but rather supporting the remedies through a different type
of healing. To explore this possibility, I will be focusing on one component of the OE medical
corpus in particular: efficacy phrases. However, no scholarship has thoroughly investigated EPs
in OE medical texts. Therefore, for a foundation, I will be utilizing scholarship on EPs from later
periods in English.
Claire Jones was the first to thoroughly analyze “tag phrases”, with a focus on EPs in
Medieval English texts and a short interlude on OE remedies. She broke down different
subgroups of EPs, paying special attention to legal and formulaic implications.53 Francisco
Alonso-Almeida et al. followed Jones’ example but focused their analysis of Medieval English
medical recipes on the “formulation of promise” within the framework of Relevance Theory and
utterances.54 More recently, Martti Mäkinen applied these frameworks to Early Modern medical

52 Greenberg. “What If the Placebo Effect Isn't a Trick?” online.
53 Jones. “Formula and Formulation: ‘Efficacy Phrases’ in Medieval English Medical Manuscripts.” 199–

209.

54 Alonso-Almeida, et al. “The Formulation of Promise in Medieval English Medical Recipes.” 137–154.

12
recipes, adding impressive statistical analysis of the appearance and purpose of EPs in the texts
to demonstrate advances in medicine and scientific thinking.55 I will base the foundation of my
survey and analysis of EPs in the OE medical corpus on these works in my dissertation.
However, I will go one step further and hypothesize that the placebo effect is the mechanism
through which the EPs are medically potent.
EPs are statements that frame individual OE remedies and range from simple evaluations,
such as “this is a good remedy for [medical issue],” to beginning or ending a charm with full
efficacy statements, such as, “this is a special leechdom.”56 Though these phrases may not, at
first, appear to add anything concrete to the remedies they refer to, EPs are common in AS
medical texts and those from later periods.57 To hypothesize the medical use of the EPs, I argue
that they are functionally identical to a tool in contemporary placebo-based medicine: intention
setting.58 Intention setting is the use of verbal mantras that state the intended outcome of placebo
therapy, such as “this is a special treatment that will ease my pain,” and is particularly effective
when used in settings of faith healing.59
To study how intention setting in a religious environment elicits a powerful placebo
effect, I will be focusing on three influential papers for this review. First, an article by Richard
Brockman, which focused on the benefits of placebo for mental ailments. Part ethnography, part
neuropsychiatric analysis, Brockman detailed how he incorporated a patient’s belief in magic

55 Mäkinen. “Efficacy phrases in Early Modern English Medical Recipes.” 158–178.
56 Cockayne, ed. Leechdoms, Wortcunning, and Starcraft of Early England. vol. III. p. 63-89
57 Jones. “Formula and Formulation: ‘Efficacy Phrases’ in Medieval English Medical Manuscripts.” 199.
58 Kaptchuk. “Placebo Studies and Ritual Theory.” 1852.
59 Caspi. “Sham in CAM.” 233.

13
into her successful treatment for schizotypal personality disorder.60 For a view on placebo-based
healing of physical ailments, I turn to an article by Anette Langås-Larsen et al. In this study,
researchers compiled the success of Complementary and Alternative Medicine (CAM) in
Northern Norway. Once completed, the study concluded that the most successful healers using
faith healing and intention setting had to be viewed by patients as trustworthy, calm, mentally
strong, and open to a possible spiritual dimension.61 Finally, for a broader view of how to place
these studies in a framework, Michael Breslin and Christopher Lewis reviewed several
promising studies on the medical viability of prayer (a common form of intention setting),
argued for the classification of different types of prayer for increased clarity in both studies and
application, and theorized that beyond the placebo effect, there may be other causal mechanisms
at work that should be noted in future studies.62
Combined, these studies provide frameworks for how the placebo effect is applied in
settings of faith healing for mental and physical ailments, as well as guidelines for approaching
such studies with attention to causal mechanisms and practitioners.63 These studies also
demonstrate “that routine biomedical pharmacological and procedural interventions contain
significant ritual dimensions,”64 and that setting intentions within contexts of faith healing can
elicit powerful medical benefits, even over and above conventional medications.65
60 Brockman. “Aspects of Psychodynamic Neuropsychiatry III.” 563–72.
61 Langås-Larsen, et al. “‘The Prayer Circles in the Air’: a Qualitative Study about Traditional Healer

Profiles and Practice in Northern Norway.” 1476638.

62 Breslin and Lewis. “Theoretical Models of the Nature of Prayer and Health.” 9–21.
63 “a causal mechanism is the most immediate and physical means by which something is accomplished.”

“causal mechanism” APA Dictionary. online.

64 Kaptchuk. “Placebo Studies and Ritual Theory.” 1849.
65 Theissen. “Ritual and Healing.” The Oxford Handbook of Early Christian Ritual. pp. 444–62.

14
However, how can these modern studies be applied to the AS context and practice? As
many AS remedies were ineffective, in some cases even harmful, pharmacologically,66 placebo
must have been a major factor in the success and reputation of early physicians. According to
Lisbeth Sachs, a leading scholar of relations between magic and placebo-based healing, “the
early history of medicine can be read as a narrative about placebo effects.”67
In regards to practitioners, recent AS scholarship theorized how these remedies may have
functioned practically or mechanically, as there is little written in the texts that directly addresses
application. Banham and Voth summarized this dearth in regards to surgery. In an article, they
argued that most mechanical processes would have been excluded from the OE medical corpus
as these techniques were transmitted by non-textual means.68 Therefore, these texts rarely
mention field application, let alone the intention setting that EPs may allude to.
However, some scholars have done promising work on the application of medical charms
in the AS period and later. While charms are not EPs, they have similar incantations which,
though preserved in texts, were often performed orally. Peter Jones and Lea Olsan focus on
childbirth charms in AS and later medicine, with attention to how these rituals were performed,
who performed them, the charm content of such rituals, and how this knowledge was recorded
and circulated in manuscripts.69 They also emphasize the power of words in AS medicine by

66 Horden. “What's Wrong with Early Medieval Medicine?” 20.
67 Sachs. “Effects of Magic Come in from the Cold.” 343.
68 Banham and Voth. “The Diagnosis and Treatment of Wounds in the Old English Medical Collections:

Anglo-Saxon Surgery?” Wounds and Wound Repair in Medieval Culture. p. 85.

69 Jones and Olsan. “Performative Rituals for Conception and Childbirth in England, 900–1500.” 406–

433.

15
identifying several devices that increase “illocutionary force”70 in these charm performances,
such as the inclusion of scripture and “nonsense” formulas.71 Similarly, Olsan studies the
language of Middle English charms, with attention to the use of both English and Latin.
Directions for performance are almost always in English, while incantations or words for power
are in Latin. This shows a hierarchy of language, but also the implied benefit of using Latin in
Middle English charm medicine, due to the language’s learned connotations or a belief that
archaic or nonsense Latin may have increased the power of charms. Jones’ and Olsan’s work not
only demonstrates the use of faith healing but potentially the shaping of language by
practitioners in order to exploit it. 72
This section has established EPs as a form of intention setting, which is a common tool
used to trigger the placebo effect, especially in the context of faith healing. I have also provided
frameworks for how to study the medical application of this process, through modern analogues
on placebo and parallels in research on verbal charm application. However, there is still one
ambiguity to address: AS faith itself. According to Bonser, faith healing is “that dangerous field,
placed between theology and medicine, that no one has dared thoroughly to explore.”73 Faith
healing is essential to my project, as it functions as a bridge between EPs and placebo. However,
the study of faith healing is complicated, as the idea of AS faith is complicated.

70 “The illocutionary force of an utterance is the speaker's intention in producing that utterance. An

illocutionary act is an instance of a culturally-defined speech act type, characterized by a particular
illocutionary force; for example, promising, advising, warning, etc.” Austin. How to Do Things with
Words. p. 123.
71 nonsense formulas are strings of meaningless words, usually inspired by Latin, that invoke a sense of

mystery and power.

72 Olsan. “The Language of Charms in a Middle English Recipe Collection.” 31–37.
73 Bonser. The Medical Background of Anglo-Saxon England. p. 34.

16
As discussed at length by Karen Jolly, it is a fruitless task to pull apart the layers of
“pagan” and “Christian” in OE texts.74 Jolly argued that pagan elements in charms were not
simply survivals, but conscious decisions by local monastics and the Church at large to be
adaptive. She also argues that this invention and combination on the part of the church and those
involved with charm practices allows for a scholarship that crosses the dualities of science and
magic, prayer and charm.
I agree with Jolly’s assertions, but I will take her thinking a step further. Beyond seeing
this combination of belief systems in OE medical texts as evidence of faith healing, the
hybridization of belief in OE remedies allows the placebo effect to be compounded, with two
belief systems working at once, simultaneously. The compounding of multiple forms of belief
when applying placebo strengthens the healing effects of the remedy more than using only one
belief system.75 Therefore, warding against pagan niht-gengan by repeating Christian psalms
may have induced powerful placebo effects in AS patients. Beyond the ingredients and botanical
elements within these OE texts, ancient healers may have been ahead of modern science by
enhancing remedies with EPs and prayers— regardless of which Gods they were directed to.

IV. CONCLUSION
The analysis of EPs in AS medicine through the lens of the placebo effect may allow for a
more robust understanding of OE texts and new historical readings of these texts in use. This
process would mediate the dichotomy between rational and belief-driven elements of the OE
74 Jolly. Popular Religion in Late Saxon England.
75 Khalil and Alsanad. “The Compound Effect of Cupping Therapy: Searching Beyond the Meridians.”

101–103.

17
medical corpus, with EPs as a case study of potential placebos. Instead of separating viable
medicine away from folkloric “humbug”, the two coexist—reinforcing one another as opposed to
belief contaminating or weakening “rational” science.
As for differences within the faith of AS England, the pagan and Christian elements were
inextricable.76 There are layered belief systems at work in OE medical texts, and this
compounding of multiple sources of placebo has been shown to be more powerful than one
source alone.77 To explore these nuances, my dissertation will also touch on other dichotomies in
the study of AS medicine: Christian versus pagan, classical versus insular, and remedies versus
charms. Most broadly, this research aims to shed new, less rigid methodological light on the strict
hierarchies between cultural practice as a quaint historical relic and empirical science as its
supposedly ahistorical alternative.

76 Jolly. Popular Religion in Late Saxon England.
77 Khalil and Alsanad. “The Compound Effect of Cupping Therapy.”

18

WORKS CITED

Manuscripts
London, British Library, Royal 12 D.xvii
Ker 264, arts. 1-3 s. x. med
London, British Library, Harley 585, ff. 130-93
Ker 231, art. 2 s. x/xi
London, British Library, Cotton Vitellius C.iii, ff. 11-85
Ker 219, art. 1 s. xi

FC B.21.2.1

FC B.21.3

FC B.21.2.1

Secondary Sources
Alonso-Almeida, Francisco, and Mercedes Cabrera-Abreu. “The formulation of promise in
Medieval English medical recipes: A relevance-theoretic approach.” Neophilologus. 86.1
(2002): 137–154.
APA Dictionary Online. 2019. dictionary.apa.org
Arthur, Ciaran. ‘Charms’, Liturgies, and Secret Rites in Early Medieval England. Boydell Press,
2018.
Austin, John Langshaw. How to Do Things with Words. Oxford University Press, 1975.
Baader, G. “Early Medieval Latin Adaptations of Byzantine Medicine in Western Europe.”
Dumbarton Oaks Papers. 38 (1984): 251–9.
Banham, Debby. “A Millennium in Medicine? New Medical Texts and Ideas in England in the
Eleventh Century.” Anglo-Saxons: Studies Presented to Cyril Roy Hart (2006): 230–42.
Banham, Debby and Christine Voth. “The Diagnosis and Treatment of Wounds in the Old
English Medical Collections: Anglo-Saxon Surgery?” Wounds and Wound Repair in
Medieval Culture. Ed. Larissa Tracy and Kelly DeVries. Brill, 2015. pp. 153–74.
Berdoe, Edward. The Origin and Growth of the Healing Art: A Popular History of Medicine in
All Ages and Countries. Swan, Sonnenschein, & Co, 1893.

19

Bonser, Wilfrid. “Anglo-Saxon Medical Nomenclature.” English and Germanic Studies. 4
(1952): 13–9.
—The Medical Background of Anglo-Saxon England: a Study in History, Psychology, and
Folklore. Wellcome Historical Medical Library, 1963.
Brennessel, Barbara, Michael Drout, and Robyn Gravel. “A Reassessment of the Efficacy of
Anglo-Saxon Medicine.” Anglo-Saxon England. 34 (2005): 183–195.
Breslin, Michael J. and Christopher Alan Lewis. “Theoretical Models of the Nature of Prayer and
Health: A Review.” Mental Health, Religion & Culture. 11.1 (2008): 9–21.
Brockman, Richard. “Aspects of Psychodynamic Neuropsychiatry III: Magic Spells, the Placebo
Effect, and Neurobiology.” Journal of the American Academy of Psychoanalysis and
Dynamic Psychiatry. 39.3 (2011): 563–72.
Cameron, M.L. Anglo-Saxon Medicine. Cambridge University Press, 1993.
— “Anglo-Saxon medicine and magic.” Anglo-Saxon England. 17 (1988): 191–215.
Caspi, Opher, Cari Stellhorn, and Melinda Connor. “Sham in CAM.” Evidence-Based Integrative
Medicine 1.4 (2004): 233-240.
Cockayne, Thomas Oswald, ed. Leechdoms, Wortcunning, and Starcraft of Early England:
Being a Collection of Documents, for the most part never before printed, illustrating
the History of Science in this Country before the Norman Conquest. vol. I, II, III. London,
Longman, Roberts, and Green, 1864-6.
D’Aronco, Maria A. “Ad vesice dolorem et ad eos qui urinam non faciunt (For bladder pain and
when a person cannot urinate): nephrological disorders in Anglo-Saxon medicine.” Journal
of nephrology. 22 (2009): 42–49.
Elshakry, Marwa. “When science became Western: Historiographical reflections.” Isis.
101.1 (2010): 98–109.
Getz, Faye. Medicine in the English Middle Ages. Princeton University Press, 1998.
Grattan, J. H. G, and Charles Singer. Anglo-Saxon Magic and Medicine, Illustrated
Specially from the Semi-pagan Text “Lacnunga” Oxford University Press, 1952.
Greenberg, Gary. “What If the Placebo Effect Isn't a Trick?” The New York Times,
November 7 2018. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/07/magazine/placebo-effect-

20
medicine.html Accessed November 10, 2018.
Harrison, Freya, Aled E. L. Roberts, Rebecca Gabrilska, Kendra P. Rumbaugh, Christina
Lee, and Stephen P. Diggle. “A 1,000-year-old Antimicrobial Remedy with
Antistaphylococcal Activity.” MBio. 6.4 (2015): 1115–29.
Hollis, Stephanie, and Michael Wright. Old English Prose of Secular Learning. D.S. Brewer,
1992.
Horden, Peregrine. “What's Wrong with Early Medieval Medicine?” Social History of Medicine.
24.1 (2011): 5–25.
Jolly, Karen Louise. Popular Religion in Late Saxon England: Elf Charms in Context.
University of North Carolina Press, 1996.
Jones, Claire. “Formula and Formulation: ‘Efficacy Phrases’ in Medieval English Medical
Manuscripts.” Neuphilologische Mitteilungen. 99.2 (1998): 199–209.
Jones, Peter Murray & Olsan, Lea T. “Performative Rituals for Conception and Childbirth in
England, 900–1500.” Bulletin of the History of Medicine. 89.3 (2015): 406–433.
Kaptchuk, Ted J. “Placebo Studies and Ritual Theory: a Comparative Analysis of Navajo,
Acupuncture and Biomedical Healing.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society.
366.1572 (2011): 1849–1858.
Kenneally, Daniel. “Cockayne, Thomas Oswald (bap. 1809, d. 1873), philologist and
teacher.” Oxford Dictionary of National Biography. September 23, 2004. Oxford
University Press. Online.
Khalil, Mohamed, and Saud Alsanad. “The Compound Effect of Cupping Therapy: Searching
Beyond the Meridians.” Journal of Acupuncture Research. 35.3 (2018): 101–3.
Langås-Larsen, Anette; Salamonsen, Anita ; Kristoffersen, Agnete Egilsdatter ; Stub, Trine. “The
Prayer Circles in the Air’: a Qualitative Study about Traditional Healer Profiles and
Practice in Northern Norway.” International Journal of Circumpolar Health. 77.1 (2018):
1476638.
Mäkinen, Martti. “Efficacy Phrases in Early Modern English Medical Recipes.” Medical Writing
in Early Modern English. Ed. Irma Taavitsainen and Päivi Pahta. Cambridge University
Press, 2011. pp. 158–178. Print.
Meaney, Audrey. “The Practice of Medicine in England about the Year 1000.” Social History of
Medicine. 13.2 (2000): 221–237.

21

McVaugh, Michael. “The Liber de diversis medicinis in the Thornton Manuscript (MS Lincoln
Cathedral A.5.2) (Book Review).” Isis. 62.4 (1971): 542.
Morton, Leslie T., and Jeremy M. Norman. Morton's Medical Bibliography: An Annotated
Check-List of Texts Illustrating the History of Medicine (Garrison and Morton). 5th ed.,
Scholar Press, 1991.
Oxford English Dictionary Online, 2019. ww.oed.com
Olds, Barbara M. University of Denver. The Anglo-Saxon Leechbook III: A Critical Edition and
Translation. 1984. Unpublished PhD Dissertation.
Olsan, Lea T. “The Language of Charms in a Middle English Recipe Collection.” ANQ: A
Quarterly Journal of Short Articles, Notes and Reviews. 18.1 (2005): 31–37.
Ossola, Alexandra. “Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria Are No Match For Medieval Potion.”
Popular Science, March 30 2015. https://www.popsci.com/ancient-medical-remedy-worksagainst-modern-resistant-bacteria/ Accessed June 11 2018.
Payne, J.F. English Medicine in the Anglo-Saxon. Times Oxford, 1904.
Pettit, Edward. Anglo-Saxon Remedies, Charms, and Prayers from British Library Ms Harley
585: Commentary and bibliography. vol. I and II. Edwin Mellen Press, 2001.
Pollington, Stephen. Leechcraft: Early English Charms, Plantlore and Healing. Anglo-Saxon
Books, 2000.
Raj, Kapil. “Beyond Pstcolonialism and Postpositivism: Circulation and the Global History of
Science.” Isis. 104.2 (2013): 337–347.
Rubin, Stanley. Medieval English Medicine. David & Charles, 1974.
Sachs, Lisbeth. “Effects of Magic Come in from the Cold: Pictorial Evidence of Placebo Effect.”
Scandinavian Journal of Public Health. 34.4 (2006): 342–345.
Storms, Godfrid. Anglo-Saxon Magic. M. Nijhoff, 1948.
Talbot, Charles H. Medicine in Medieval England. Oldbourne, 1967.
Theissen, Gerd. “Ritual and Healing.” The Oxford Handbook of Early Christian Ritual. Ed. Risto
Uro et al. Oxford University Press, 2018. pp. 444–62. Print.

22
Townend, B. R. “The Narrative Charm with pecial reference to the Cure of Toothache.” British
Dental Journal 85.2 (1948): 29-34.
Van Arsdall, Anne. Medieval Herbal Remedies: The Old English Herbarium and Anglo-Saxon
Medicine. Routledge, 2002.
Voigts, Linda. “Anglo-Saxon Plant Remedies and the Anglo-Saxons”, Isis. 70 (1979): 250–268.
Voth, Christine Bobbitt. University of Cambridge. An Analysis of the Tenth-Century Anglo-Saxon
Manuscript London, British Library, Royal 12. D. xvii, 2015. Unpublished PhD
Dissertation.
Vriend, Hubert Jan de. The Old English Herbarium;and Medicina de quadrupedibus. Oxford
University Press, 1984.
Watkins, Frances, Barbara Pendry, Alberto Sanchez-Medina, and Olivia Corcoran.
“Antimicrobial Assays of Three Native British Plants used in Anglo-Saxon Medicine
for Wound Healing Formulations in 10th Century England.” Journal of
Ethnopharmacology. 144.2 (2012): 408-415.

