THE ODYSSEY OF HOMER
Translated into English Blank Verse by William Cullen Bryant
BOOK I — Visit of Pallas to Telemachus

(Re-OCR'd from the Internet Archive scan via Tesseract 4.1.1 at 400 DPI,
then run through a focused cleanup pass. Spot-check before quoting.)

---

Book I, 3
The husband just returned from war. Yet well
He knew the bitter penalty, for we 50
Warned him. We sent the herald Argicide,
Bidding him neither slay the chief nor woo
His queen, for that Orestes, when he came
To manhood and might claim his heritage,
Would take due vengeance for Atrides slain. ss
So Hermes said ; his prudent words moved not
The purpose of Ægisthus, who now pays
The forfeit of his many crimes at once.”

Pallas, the blue-eyed goddess, thus replied : —
“O father, son of Saturn, king of kings! 60
Well he deserved his death. So perish all
Guilty of deeds like his! But I am grieved
For sage Ulysses, that most wretched man,

So long detained, repining, and afar

From those he loves, upon a distant isle 65

Girt by the waters of the central deep, —

A forest isle, where dwells a deity

The daughter of wise Atlas, him who knows

The ocean to its utmost depths, and holds

Upright the lofty columns which divide 70

The earth from heaven. The daughter there detains

The unhappy chieftain, and with flattering words

Would win him to forget his Ithaca.

Meanwhile, impatient to behold the smokes

That rise from hearths in his own land, he pines 7s
’ And willingly would die. Is not thy heart,

Olympivs, touched by this?) And did he not
4 The Odyssey.

Pay grateful sacrifice to thee beside

The Argive fleet in the broad realm of Troy?

Why then, O Jove, art thou so wroth with him?”  ®%
Then answered cloud-compelling Jove: “ My

child,

What words have passed thy lips? Can I forget

Godlike Ulysses, who in gifts of mind

Eexcels all other men, and who has brought

Large offerings to the gods that dwell in heaven? 85

Yet he who holds the earth in his embrace,

Neptune, pursues him with perpetual hate

Because of Polypheme, the Cyclops, strong

Beyond all others of his giant race,

Whose eye Ulysses had put out. The nymph
Thoosa brought him forth, — a daughter she

Of Phorcys, ruling in the barren deep, —

And in the covert of o’erhanging rocks

She met with Neptune. For this cause the god

Who shakes the shores, although he slay him not, 95

Sends forth Ulysses wandering far away

From his own country. Let us now consult

Together and provide for his return,

And Neptune will lay by his wrath, for vain

It were for one like him to strive alone r00

Against the might of all the immortal gods.”

| And then the blue-eyed Pallas spake again : —

“OQ father! son of Saturn, king of kings!

If such the pleasure of the blessed gods

That now the wise Ulysses shall return 105
Book I. 5
To his own land, let us at once despatch
Hermes, the Argicide, our messenger,
Down to Ogygia, to the bright-haired nymph,
And make our steadfast purpose known to bring
The sufferer Ulysses to his home, 11
And I will haste to Ithaca, and move
His son, that with a resolute heart he call
The long-haired Greeks together and forbid
The excesses of the suitor train, who slay
His flocks and slow-paced beeves with crooked
horns. O Vass
To Sparta I will send him and the sands
Of Pylos, to inquire for the return
Of his dear father. So a glorious fame
Shall gather round him in the eyes of men.”
She spake, and fastened underneath her feet — 2
The fair, ambrosial golden sandals worn
To bear her over ocean like the wind,
And o’er the boundless land. In hand she took,
Well tipped with trenchant brass, the mighty spear,
Heavy and huge and strong, with which she bears ws
Whole phalanxes of heroes to the earth,
When she, the daughter of a mighty sire, |
Is angered. From the Olympian heights she
plunged, | ;
And stood among the men of Ithaca,
Just at the porch and threshold of their chief, «x
Ulysses. In her hand she bore the spear,
And seemed the stranger Mentes, he who led
6 The Odyssey.

The Taphians. There before the gate she found

The haughty suitors. Some beguiled the time 134

With draughts, while sitting on the hides of beeves

Which they had slaughtered. Heralds were with

them,

And busy menials: some who in the bowls

Tempered the wine with water, some who cleansed

The tables with light sponges, and who set

The banquet forth and carved the meats for all. 140
Telemachus the godlike was the first

To see the goddess as he sat among

The crowd of suitors, sad at heart, and thought

Of his illustrious father, who might come .

And scatter those who filled his palace halls, =u

And win new honor, and regain the rule

Over his own. As thus he sat and mused

Among the suitors, he beheld where stood

Pallas, and forth he sprang ; he could not bear

To keep a stranger waiting at his door. 150

He came, and taking her right hand received

The brazen spear, and spake these winged words: —
“Hail, stranger! thou art truly welcome here;

First come and share our feast and be refreshed,

Then say what thou requirest at our hands.” 155
He spake and led the way, and in his steps |

Pallas Athené followed. Entering then

The lofty halls, he set the spear upright

By a tall column, in the armory :

With polished walls, where rested many a lance 160
Book I. 7
Of the large-souled Ulysses. Then he placed
His guest upon a throne, o’er which he spread
A covering many-hued and beautiful,
And gave her feet a footstool. Near to her
He drew his party-colored seat, aloof 165
From where the suitors sat ; that so his guest
Might not amid those haughty revellers
Be wearied with the tumult and enjoy
His meal the less, and that himself might ask
News of his absent father. Ina bowl 178
Of silver, from a shapely ewer of gold,
A maid poured water for the hands, and set
A polished table near them. Then approached
A venerable matron bringing bread :
And delicacies gathered from the board ; 175
And he who served the feast before them placed
Chargers with various meats, and cups of gold ;
While round the board a herald moved, and poured
Wine for the guests. The haughty suitors now
Came in, and took their places on the thrones xe
And couches ; heralds poured upon their hands
The water ; maidens heaped the canisters
With bread, and all put forth their hands to share
The banquet on the board, while to the brim
Boys filled the beakers. When the calls of thirst ms
And hunger were appeased, the suitors thought
Of other things that well become a feast, —
Song and the dance. And then a herald brought
A shapely harp, and gave it to the hands
8 The Odyssey.
Of Phemius, who had only by constraint 190
Sung to the suitors. On the chords he struck
A prelude to his lay, while, as he played,
Telemachus, that others might not hear,
Leaned forward, and to blue-eyed Pallas spake : —
“My friend and guest, wilt thou take no offence 1s

At what I say? These revellers enjoy
The harp and song, for at no cost of theirs
They waste the substance of another man,
Whose white bones now are mouldering in the rain
Upon some main-land, or are tossed about 200
By ocean billows. Should they see him once
In Ithaca, their prayers would rather rise

; For swifter feet than richer stores of gold
And raiment. But an evil fate is his,
And he has perished. Even should we hear 205
From any of the dwellers upon earth
That he is near at hand, we could not hope.
For him is no return. But new, I pray,
Tell me, and frankly tell me, who thou art,
And of what race of men, and where thy home, 210
And who thy parents ; how the mariners
Brought thee to Ithaca, and who they claim
To be, for well I deem thou couldst not come
Hither on foot. All this, I pray, relate
Truly, that I may know the whole. Art thou — 2
For the first time arrived, or hast thou been
My father’s guest? for many a stranger once
Resorted to our palace, and he knew
Book I. 9

The way to win the kind regard of men.” a19

Pallas, the blue-eyed goddess, answered thus :—
“T will tell all and truly. J am named
Mentes ; my father was the great In war
Anchialus. I rule a people skilled
To wield the oar, the Taphians, and I come
With ship and crew across the dark blue deep
To Temesé, and to a race whose speech
Is different from my own, in quest of brass,
And bringing bright steel with me. I have left
Moored at the field behind the town my bark,
Within the bay of Reithrus, and beneath 230
The woods of Neius. We claim to be
Guests by descent, and from our fathers’ time,
As thou wilt learn if thou shouldst meet and ask
Laertes, the old hero. It is said
He comes no more within the city walls, 235
But in the fields dwells sadly by himself,

- Where an old handmaid sets upon his board
His food and drink when weariness unnerves
His limbs in creeping o’er the fertile soil
Of his rich vineyard. I am come because 240
I heard thy father had at last returned,
And now am certain that the gods delay
His journey hither ; for the illustrious man
Cannot have died, but 1s detained alone
Somewhere upon the ocean, in some spot 45
Girt by the waters. There do cruel men
And savage keep him, pining to depart.
1 *
10 The Odyssey.

Now let me speak of what the gods reveal,

And what I deem will surely come to pass,

Although I am no seer and have no skill om

In omens drawn from birds. Not long the chief

Will be an exile from his own dear land,

Though fettered to his place by links of steel ;

For he has large invention, and will plan

A way for his escape. Now tell me this, 255

And truly ; tall in stature as thou art,

Art thou in fact Ulysses’ son? In face

And glorious eyes thou dost resemble him

Exceedingly ; for he and I of yore

Were oftentimes companions, ere he sailed 26n

For Ilium, whither also went the best

Among the Argives in their roomy ships,

Nor have we seen each other since that day.”
Telemachus, the prudent, spake: ‘‘O guest,

True answer shalt thou have. My mother says 2s

Yam his son; I know not ; never man

<new his own father. Would I were the son

Of one whose happier lot it was to meet

Amidst his own estates the approach of age.

Now the most wretched of the sons of men 270

Is he to whom they say I owe my birth.

Thus is thy question answered.” Then again

Spake blue-eyed Pallas: “ Of a truth, the gods

Ordain not that thy race, in years to come,

Should be inglorious, since Penelope 275

Hath borne thee such as I behold thee now. :
Look IL. I!

But frankly answer me, — what feast is here,
And what is this assembly? What may be
The occasion? is a banquet given ? is this
A wedding? A collation, where the guests 280
Furnish the meats, I think it cannot be,
50 riotously goes the revel on
Throughout the palace. <A well-judging man,
If he should come among them, would be moved
With anger at the shameful things they do.” 285

Again Telemachus, the prudent, spake : —
‘Since thou dost ask me, stranger, know that once’
Rich and illustrious might this house be called
While yet the chief was here. But now the gods
Have grown unkind and willed it otherwise, 290
‘They make his fate a mystery beyond
The fate of other men. I should not grieve
So deeply for his loss if he had fallen
With his companions on the field of Troy,
Or midst his kindred when the war was o’er. 208
‘Then all the Greeks had built his monument,
And he had left his son a heritage
Of glory. Now has he become the prey
Of Harpies, perishing ingloriously,
Unseen, his fate unheard of, and has left poe
Mourning and grief, my portion. Not for him
Alone I grieve ; the gods have cast on me
Yet other hardships. All the chiefs who rule
The isles, Dulichium, Samos, and the groves i
That shade Zacynthus, and who bear the sway 305
12 The Odyssey.

In rugged Ithaca, have come to woo

My mother, and from day to day consume

My substance. She rejects not utterly

Their hateful suit, and yet she cannot bear

To end it by a marriage. Thus they waste gre
My heritage, and soon will seek my life.”

Again in grief and anger Pallas spake : —
“Vea, greatly dost thou need the absent chief
Ulysses here, that he might lay his hands
Upon these shameless suitors. Were he now © 35
To come and stand before the palace gate
With helm and buckler and two spears, as first O
I saw him in our house, when drinking wine
And feasting, just returned from Ephyré,

Where Ilus dwelt, the son of Mermerus, — 320
For thither went Ulysses in a bark,

To seek a deadly drug with which to taint

His brazen arrows ; Ilus gave it not ;

He feared the immortal gods; my father gave

The poison, for exceedingly he loved 325
His guest, — could now Ulysses, in such guise,
Once meet the suitors, short would be their lives
And bitter would the marriage banquet be.

Yet whether he return or not to take

Vengeance, in his own palace, on this crew 330
Of wassailers, rests only with the gods.

Now let me counsel thee to think betimes

How thou shalt thrust them from thy palace gates.
Observe me, and attend to what I say:
Book I. 13
To-morrow thou shalt call the Achaian chiefs 3s
To an assembly ; speak before them all,
And be the gods thy witnesses. Command
The suitors all to separate for their homes ;
And if thy mother’s mind be bent to wed,
Let her return to where her father dwells, 34
A mighty prince, and there they will appoint
Magnificent nuptials, and an ample dower
Such as should honor a beloved child.
And now, if thou wilt heed me, I will give
A counsel for thy good. Man thy best ship; a
With twenty rowers, and go forth to seek
News of thy absent father. ‘Thou shalt hear
Haply of him from some one of the sons
Of men, or else some word of rumor sent
By Jove, revealing what mankind should know. 30
First shape thy course for Pylos, and inquire
Of noble Nestor ; then, at Sparta, ask
Of fair-haired Menelaus, for he came
Last of the mailed Achaians to his home.
And shouldst thou learn that yet thy father lives, 3ss
And will return, have patience yet a year,
However hard it seem. But shouldst thou find
That he is now no more, return forthwith
To thy own native land, and pile on high
His monument, and let the funeral rites 36e
Be sumptuously performed as may become
The dead, and let thy mother wed again.
And when all this is fully brought te pass,
14 The Odyssey.

Take counsel with thy spirit and thy heart |

How to destroy the suitor crew that haunt 365

Thy palace, whether by a secret snare

Or open force. No longer shouldst thou act

As if thou wert a boy ; thou hast outgrown

The age of childish sports. Hast thou not heard

What honor the divine Orestes gained 378

With all men, when he slew the murderer,

The crafty wretch Agisthus, by whose hand

The illustrious father of Orestes died ?

And then, my friend, — for I perceive that thou

Art of a manly and a stately growth, — 375

Be also bold, that men hereafter born

May give thee praise. And now must I depart

To my good ship, and to my friends who wait,

Too anxiously perhaps, for my return.

Act wisely now, and bear my words in mind.” _ 38
The prudent youth Telemachus rejoined : —

“Well hast thou spoken, and with kind intent,

O stranger! like a father to a son;

And ne’er shall I forget what thou hast said.

Yet stay, I pray thee, though in haste, and bathe 38s "

And be refreshed, and take to thy good ship

Some gift with thee, such as may please thee well,

' Precious and rare, which thou mayst ever keep

In memory of me, —a gift like those

Which friendly hosts bestow upon their guests.” 3
Then spake the blue-eyed Pallas: “ Stay me not,

For now would I depart. Whatever gift i
Book I. 15

d
Thy heart may prompt thee to bestow, reserve
Till I come back, that I may bear it home, 304
And thou shalt take some precious thing in turn.”

So spake the blue-eyed Pallas, and withdrew,
Ascending like a bird. She filled his heart
With strength and courage, waking vividly
His father’s memory. Then the noble yout:
Went forth among the suitors. Silent all 4o0
They sat and listened to the illustrious bard,
Who sang of the calamitous return
Of the Greek host from Troy, at the command
Of Palias. From her chamber o’er the hall
The daughter of Icarius, the sage queen 405
Penelope, had heard the heavenly strain,
And knew its theme. Down by the lofty stairs |
She came, but not alone; there followed her
Two maidens. When the glorious lady reached
The threshold of the strong-built hall, where sat 4
The suitors, holding up a delicate veil
Before her face, and with a gush of tears,
The queen bespake the sacred minstrel thus :—

“Phemius! thou knowest many a_ pleasing

theme, —

The deeds of gods and heroes, such as bards ath
Are wont to celebrate. ‘Take then thy place
And sing of one of these, and let the guests
In silence drink the wine ; but cease this strain ;
It is too sad ; it cuts me to the heart, ag
And wakes a sorrow without bounds, — such grief
16 The Odyssey.

' bear for him, my lord, of whom I think
Continually ; whose glory is abroad

Through Hellas and through Argos, everywhere.”

And then Telemachus, the prudent, spake :—
“Why, O my mother! canst thou not endure —¢
That thus the well-graced poet should delight -
His hearers with a theme to which his mind
Is inly moved? The bards deserve no blame ;
Jove is the cause, for he at will inspires 429
The lay that each must sing. Reprove not, then,
The minstrel who relates the unhappy fate
Of the Greek warriors. All men most applaud
The song that has the newest theme ; and thou —
Strengthen thy heart to hear it. Keep in mind
That not alone Ulysses is cut off 435
From his return, but that with him at Troy
Have many others perished. Now withdraw
Into thy chamber ; ply thy household tasks,

The loom, the spindle ; bid thy maidens speed
Their work. ‘To say what words beseem a feast 440
Belongs to man, and most to me ; for here

Within these walls the authority is mine.”

The matron, wondering at his words, withdrew
To her own place, but in her heart laid up 444
Her son’s wise sayings. When she now had reached,
With her attendant maids, the upper rooms,

She mourned Ulysses, her beloved spouse,
And wept, till blue-eyed Pallas closed her lids
In gentle slumbers. Noisily, meanwhile,
Book I. 17
The suitors reveiled in the shadowy halls ; 450
And thus Telemachus, the prudent, spake :—
“Ve suitors of my mother, insolent
And overbearing ; cheerful be our feast,
Not riotous. It would become us well )
To listen to the lay of such a bard, ASS
So like the gods in voice. I bid you all
Meet in full council with the morrow morn,
That I may give you warning to depart
From out my palace, and to seek your feasts
Elsewhere at your own charge, —hapiy to hold 4
Your daily banquets at each other’s homes.
But if it seem to you the better way
To plunder one man’s goods, go on to waste
My substance ; I will call the immortal gods
To aid me, and if Jupiter allow 465
Fit retribution for your deeds, ye die,
Within this very palace, unavenged.”
He spake ; the suitors bit their close-pressed lips,
Astonished at the youth’s courageous words.
And thus Antinotis, Eupeithes’ son, 47
Made answer: ‘“ Most assuredly the gods,
Telemachus, have taught thee how to frame
Grand sentences and gallantly harangue.
Ne’er may the son of Saturn make thee king
Over the sea-girt Ithaca. whose isle 475
Is thy inheritance by claim of birth.”
Telemachus, the prudent, thus rejoined :—=
“Wilt thou be angry at the word I speak,
B
18 The Odyssey.

Antinotis? I would willingly accept

The kingly station if conferred by Jove. mn

Dost thou indeed regard it as the worst

Of all conditions of mankind? Not so

For him who reigns; his house grows opulent,

And he the move is honored. Many kings

Within the bounds of sea-girt Ithaca abe

There are, both young and old, let any one

Bear rule, since great Ulysses is no more ; |

But I will be the lord of mine own house,

And o’er my servants whom the godlike chief,

Ulysses, brought from war, his share of spoil.’
Eurymachus, the son of Polybus,

Addressed the youth in turn: “ Assuredly,

What man hereafter, of the Achaian race,

Shall bear the rule o’er sea-girt Ithaca * 494

Rests with the gods. But thou shalt keep thy wealth,

And may no son of violence come to make

A spoil of thy possessions while men dwell

In Ithaca. And now, my friend, I ask

Who was thy guest ; whence came he, of what land

Claims he to be, where do his kindred dwell, os

And where his patrimonial acres lie?

With tidings of thy father’s near return

Came he, or to receive a debt? How swift

Was his departure, waiting not for us

To know him! yet in aspect and in air oe

He seemed to be no man of vulgar note.”
Telemachus, the prudent, answered thus: —
Book I. . 19
* My father’s coming, O Eurymachus,
ts to be hoped no more ; nor can [ trust.
Tidings from whatsoever part they come, sv
Nor pay regard to oracles, although
My mother send to bring a soothsayer
Within the palace, and inquire of him.
But this man was my father’s guest ; he comes
From Taphos ; Mentes-is his name, a son sts ;
Of the brave chief Anchialus ; he reigns
Over the Taphians, men who love the sea.”

He spake, but in his secret heart he knew .
The immortal goddess. Then the suitors turned, )
Delighted, to the dance and cheerful song, sa
And waited for the evening. Qn their sports -

The evening with its shadowy blackness came ;
Then each to his own home withdrew to sleep,
While to his lofty chamber, in full view, — inn
Built high in that 1nagnificent palace home, 3m
Telemachus went up, and sought his couch, :
Intent on many thoughts. The chaste and sage
Dame Eurycleia by his side went up | | |
With lighted torches, — she achild of Ops,
Pisenor’s son. Her, in her early bloom, sx
Laertes purchased for a hundred beeves, |
And in his palace honored equaliy ve :
With his chaste wife ; yet never sought her bed.
He would not wrong his queen. ’T was she who
bore
The torches with Telemachus. She loved 535
ZO The Odyssey.
Her young lord more than all the other maids,
| And she had nursed him in his tender years.

He opened now the chamber dvor and sat
Upon the couch, put his soft tunic off
And placed it in the prudent matron’s hands. _— s#
She folded it and smoothed it, hung it near
To that fair bed, and, going quickly forth,
Pulled at the silver ring to close the door,
And drew the thong that moved the fastening bolt.

| He, lapped in the soft fleeces, all night long. 543
Thought of the voyage Pallas had ordained.

PCSOK II.
N OW when the Morning, child of Dawn, ap
peared,
The dear son of Ulysses left his bed - :
And put his garments on. His trenchant sword
He hung upon his shoulders, and made fast |
His shapely sandals to his shining feet, §
_ And issued from his chamber like a god.

At once he bade the clear-voiced heralds call
The long-haired Greeks to council. They obeyed,
Quickly the chiefs assembled, and when all
Were at the appointed place, Telemachus id
Went to the council, bearing in his hand
A brazen spear, yet went he not alone.
